# Getting Started

First thing we need to do is install Flagpole with npm. Go into the root of your project and run this:

```cli
npm i flagpole -g
npm i flagpole --save-dev
```

The above command installs it both locally (within the project) and globally. This is a little annoying that we have to do both. But we do. Globally is so that the command "flagpole" will run. The second one is so that your test suites can find it. You should be able to run the flagpole command now, which will give you instructions on how to use the CLI.

```cli
flagpole
```

Pretty colors, eh? Now let's initialize our project.

If you prefer to watch, rather than read, here is a [video walkthrough](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d29m9eg7AV4) of getting started.

```cli
flagpole init
```

Once you answer those questions, you should have a flagpole.json file. Now we need to create our first test scenario.

```cli
flagpole add suite
```

Answer those questions. For now, just use the default options. This will set up a basic HTML DOM test that will test Google's homepage. At the end, you should see your first test suite file in the folder you configured with `flagpole init` earlier. Now let's make sure. If we run this command you should see it listed.

```cli
flagpole list
```

Now let's go ahead and run this very basic test:

```cli
flagpole run
```

To skip the extra step of selecting your suite you can pass the “all” option. This will run all suites in your collection:

```cli
flagpole run --all
```

If you set up your project to use TypeScript you can build then run all suites with:

```cli
flagpole run --all --build
```

Sweet! How about we actually do something with the test now and run it. So open that test file that was generated by our "add suite" command earlier and add this into the next callback:

```javascript
context.assert('HTTP Status equals 200', context.response.statusCode).equals(200);
```

Now run the flagpole run command again...

```cli
flagpole run --all --build
```

And if we did everything right, then you should see something like:

```text

 ================================================== 
                    HELLO WORLD                    
 ================================================== 
 » Base URL: http://www.flosports.tv 
 » Environment: dev 
 » Took 1383ms
 
 » Passed? Yes
 
 Just getting a test to run 
   ✔  Loaded HTML Page / 
   ✔  HTTP Status equals 200 
   »  Took 1382ms

```
